Logan Mott, 15, has been captured late Friday night by the U.S. Customs and Border Protection as he tried to enter Canada from Buffalo, New York, according to the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.
Mott's mother confirmed with First Coast News on Friday evening that Logan has been detained but he is safe and sound.
He is considered a person of interest after police believe they found the body of his grandmother, 53-year-old Kristina French in the backyard of the Neptune Beach home where both of them were reported missing earlier this week.
Police say the boy’s father, Eric Mott, returned from vacation on Wednesday to find his son and his mother missing, and his Neptune Beach house ransacked.
The father, a veteran’s corrections officer with the JSO, reported several guns were also missing from the home.
Police say they found signs of foul play, as well as French's car -- a silver Dodge Dart with a Florida tag DLLT42 -- missing.
They subsequently discovered a gravesite at the Seagate address.
Police investigators have been at the home for the last few days, along with a mobile crime lab.
On Friday, authorities excavated the grave and discovered a body that matched the description of French. However, police said they are waiting on the autopsy to confirm the body's identity.
During the press conference Friday, JSO said they have video surveillance from south central Pennsylvania of a person matching his description, in a car similar to the missing Dart.
Logan Mott is considered a person of interest in the case. Police stopped short of calling him a suspect, but said in a press conference Friday "we need to talk to him about what happened in the house."
Logan Mott's mother, Carrie Campbell-Mott, told First Coast News that the boy has had some has had trouble adjusting in recent months after transferring away from his friends at Fletcher Middle School and entering Sandalwood High School.
She raised concerns in recent days that the diabetic teen might not have access to his needed insulin. Police now think he has packed enough insulin packs to last him several weeks.
In an emotional Facebook post Friday morning, Campbell-Mott pleaded for her son's safe return. 
Following his capture, she gave the following statement to Good Morning America:
"We are relieved he is safe and in custody and we just ask for everyone to give us time to sort out what happened. That no matter what, Logan is our child and we love him and are standing by him to help in any way. We want to find out what happened to Kristina and we need time for that to happen."
