A Florida teen wanted in connection with the death of his grandmother was detained as he attempted to enter Canada.
Both Logan Mott and Kristina French were reported missing earlier this week when they didn’t show up to pick up the teen’s father and girlfriend from the airport Wednesday, according to the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office. When the couple arrived, they learned their Neptune Beach home had been ransacked, the guns missing from the safe.
The Neptune Beach Police and the Jacksonville Sheriff’s Office — where Mott’s father works as a correctional officer — launched an investigation that uncovered “possible criminal violence inside the home,” CBS reported.
They later discovered remains in a shallow grave in the backyard that appear to belong to French, though they have not yet officially been identified, according to authorities.
During a press conference Friday, police said they had surveillance video from the Pennsylvania area of a person matching Mott’s description. The 15-year-old appeared to be driving a car similar to his grandmother’s, which was also reported stolen Wednesday.
He was detained by border patrol agents in Buffalo, N.Y., as he tried to cross over into Canada. Ahead of his capture, police warned that the teen was likely armed and dangerous.
Authorities emphasized Mott is only a person of interest in the case — not a suspect — and they’re looking to “talk to him about what happened at the house.”
Jacksonville Sheriff’s Office Director Ron Levenday told the news station they’re in the process of obtaining an arrest warrant for Mott on auto theft charges.
His mother, Carrie Campbell-Mott told First Coast News her son has had some trouble adjusting since moving onto high school.
In a statement to “Good Morning America” she said she was “relieved” to have her son safe and requested time for authorities to look into the death of French.
“No matter what, Logan is our child and we love him and are standing by him to help in any way,” she said. “We want to find out what happened to Kristina and we need time for that to happen.”
